Death Blossom

http://www.sudokusnake.com/deathblossom.php

6....9...38..7....1....8.745...2..1946..9..3.9..8......9....1.57.5.8.6.2.1..4.7.3
,2457,247,12345,135,,2358,258,18,,,249,12456,,12456,259,2569,16,,25,29,2356,356,,2359,,,,37,378,3467,,3467,48,,,,,1278,157,,157,258,,78,,237,1237,,1356,134567,245,2456,67,28,,23468,2367,36,2367,,48,,,34,,139,,13,,49,,28,,268,2569,,256,,89,

To understand what a Death Blossom is, you have to know what an Almost Locked
Set (ALS) is. An ALS is a set of cells with one more candidate than cells, ie
one shy of being a Locked Set. In a death blossom there is one cell, called the
stem cell, that has only two (usually) candidates. One candidate is shared with
one ALS, and the other candidate is shared with the other ALS. So if both ALS's
have a common "non-stem" candidate then it's eliminated, because all possible
values of the stem cell eliminate it. The same logic applies to a stem cell
with three or more possible values. Three's are rare. I've never seen four, but
I can't say they don't exist.

The logic is: the ALS's share a "non-stem" value (the candidate to eliminate),
and each ALS is associated with a stem-cell candidate, and an ALS can loose
only ONE value before it goes invalid, so no matter the value of the stem cell
one of the ALS's will become a Locked Set; hence we can eliminate that
candidate from outside cells seeing all occurrences in the Death Blossom.

Consider the example on this page. The stem cell is highlighted in blue with a
1 and an 8. One ALS is highlighted in yellow in the 5th column, and the other
ALS is highlighted in yellow in the 5th row. If the stem cell is a 1, then the
ALS in the 5th column becomes a naked subset and eliminates the 5 in the green
cell. If the stem cell is an 8, then the ALS in the 5th row becomes a naked
subset and also eliminates the 5 in the green cell.

Note, if you haven't yet, that if all of a candidate in a set are found in a
single other unit, you can eliminate all others of that candidate in that
separate unit. For instance, in the example on this page, if the 8 is
eliminated from the 5th row, then it becomes a set where all the 5's happen
to be in the middle box. Thus, the 5 in the green cell would be eliminated.
This concept is only noteworthy in ALS's, because in standard sets it is
swallowed up by the simpler techniques of pointing and claiming. The naked
subset eliminates all others of its values from the unit, and thus the
remaining 5's in the entire unit are in the same box and become a matter of
claiming, which has the same end result.

A death blossom usually only deals with naked ALS's, since they're generally
easy to spot, and always exist wherever there is a hidden ALS. An ALS of only
one cell may also occur, creating a form of death blossom, but this is ignored
in Sudoku Snake and is allowed to be recognized as a chained set.

Sudoku Snake gives Death Blossoms a skill value of 2200.

===============================================================================

https://www.sudoku9981.com/sudoku-solving/death-blossom.php

Death Blossom

The Death Blossom technique involves a stem cell of N candidates that sees N
petals, each an Almost Locked Set.

It is developed by extending the Aligned Pair Exclusion technique into an
arbitrary sized set of non-aligned cells (see Subset Exclusion), with most of
the cells belonging to Almost Locked Sets.

6....9...38..7....1....8.745...2..1946..9..3.9..8......9....1.57.5.8.6.2.16.4.7.3
,2457,247,12345,135,,2358,258,18,,,249,12456,,12456,259,2569,16,,25,29,2356,356,,2359,,,,37,378,3467,,3467,48,,,,,1278,157,,157,258,,78,,237,1237,,1356,134567,245,2456,67,28,,2348,2367,36,2367,,48,,,34,,139,,13,,49,,28,,,259,,25,,89,

A Death Blossom consists of a "stem" cell and an Almost Locked Set (or ALS) for
each of the stem cell's candidates. The ALS associated with a particular
candidate of the stem cell has that number as one of its own candidates, and
within the ALS, every cell that has the number as a candidate can see the stem
cell. The ALSes can't overlap; i.e., no cell can belong to more than one ALS.
Also, there must be at least one value that is a candidate of every ALS, but
is not a candidate of the stem cell.

Once we've found a Death Blossom, if an outside cell (not in any of the ALSes
and not the stem cell) sees every cell in the ALS's that has that value as a
candidate (not a stem cell candidate) then that value can be eliminated from
that cell.

Death Blossom example from Andrew Stuart's Advanced Sudoku Strategies page.

We have a stem cell at r1c9 with two candidates 1 and 8. Observe that r1c9 sees
all the 1s in the blue ALS, and r1c9 sees all the 8s in the yellow ALS. These
two ALSes are the petals. Now, by a proof by cases:

    If r1c9=1, then the blue ALS gets reduced to a Naked Triple of 3, 5 and 6
               and so r6c5<>5.
    If r1c9=8, then r5c9=7, and the remainder of the yellow ALS gets reduced to
               a Naked Pair of 1 and 5 and so r6c5<>5.

Therefore, we can eliminate 5 from r6c5.

Observe how this is an extension of Aligned Pair Exclusion, whose cells consist
of the r6c5, the blue ALS and the yellow ALS. If r6c5=5, then r1c5=1 is forced
by the blue ALS, and also r5c9=8 is forced by the yellow ALS, and so r1c9 has
no candidates remaining. The Death Blossom technique is derived by working
forwards from r1c9.

Note: If the stem cell has exactly two candidates, like the example above, then
the same eliminations can be replicated using a ALS-XY-Wing move.

===============================================================================

https://www.sudopedia.org/wiki/Solving_Technique


C:\Users\User\Downloads\Nonrepetative paths in Sudoku.pdf
